Law No. (15) of 2016 Promulgating the Civil Human Resources Law

We, Tamim bin Hamad Al‐Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar,
Having reviewed:
‐ The Constitution;
‐ Law No. (24) of 2002 on Retirement and Pensions, as amended;
‐ Law No. (2) of 2004 on People with Special Needs;
‐ The Human Resources Management Law Promulgated by Law No. (8) of
2009;
‐ Emiri Decree No. (6) of 2016 on the Organizational Structure of the
Ministry of Administrative Development, Labor and Social Affairs;
‐ The draft law submitted by the Council of Ministers; and
‐ Having consulted the Advisory Council,
Hereby enact the following Law:
Article (1)
The provisions of the Civil Human Resources Law attached hereto shall enter
into full force and effect.
Article (2)
The provisions of the attached Law shall apply to all civil servants in the
ministries, other government agencies and public bodies and institutions,
except the following categories to the extent provided for by their respective
employment regulations:
1. Judges and their assistants, members and assistants of the Public
Prosecution;
2. Employees of the Emiri Diwan;
3. Employees of the diplomatic and consular corps;
4. University staff members;
5. Employees of Qatar Petroleum;
6. Employees of Qatar Investment Authority;
7. Employees of the Audit Bureau.
Article (3)
The government agencies subject to the provisions of the attached Law and the
agencies the budget of which is financed by the State shall provide the Ministry
of Administrative Development, Labor and Social Affairs with all data related to
human resources required by the Ministry.
Article (4)

The government agencies whose employees' affairs are regulated by
employment regulations or special rules shall provide the Ministry with such
regulations, drafts thereof and amendments made thereto in order to be
reviewed and express opinion thereon by the Prime Minister to ensure that
such regulations comply with the general policy of the State in the field of
human resources.
Article (5)
The Council of Ministers shall issue the Executive Regulations of the attached
Law. Until then, the resolutions issued in implementation of the provisions of
the Human Resources Management Law referred to above shall remain in force,
without prejudice to the provisions of the attached Law.
Article (6)
The above‐mentioned Human Resources Management Law is hereby repealed.
Article (7)
All competent bodies, each within its area of competence, shall implement this
Law which shall enter into force as of the day following the date of the
publication thereof in the Official Gazette.

Tamim bin Hamad Al‐Thani
Emir of the State of Qatar

Issued in the Emiri Diwan
On: 06/02/1438 AH.
Corresponding to: 06/11/2016 AD.

Civil Human Resources Law
Chapter I
Definitions
Article (1)

In implementation of the provisions hereof and the Executive Regulations
hereof, the following words and expressions shall have the meanings assigned
thereto respectively, unless the context requires otherwise:
Ministry

: The Ministry of Administrative Development,
Labor and Social Affairs.

Minister

: The Minister of Administrative Development,
Labor and Social Affairs.

Government Agency

: The ministry, government apparatus or public
body or institution, as the case may be.

Chairman

: The Minister or chairman of the government
apparatus or chairman of the public body or
institution, as the case may be.

CEO

: The undersecretary, the official following the
Chairman or the official to which the
administrative unit in charge of human resources
in the government agency is affiliated, as the case
may be.

Competent
Department

: The administrative unit in charge of the
implementation of the human resources polices
in the Ministry.

Department

: The administrative unit in charge of human
resources in the government agency.

Employee

: Whoever occupies a position in accordance with
the provisions hereof and the Executive
Regulations hereof.

Basic Salary

: The salary prescribed for the financial grade of
the employee in accordance with Grade/Salary
Schedules Nos. (1) and (2) attached hereto, plus
the due periodical increments, excluding other
increments, allowances or bonuses or in
accordance with the employment contract.
: The basic salary plus the increments and

Gross Salary

allowances prescribed under the provisions
hereof and the Executive Regulations hereof or
the employment contract.
Medical Authority

Competent
Authority

: The medical centers, public and private hospitals
and licensed clinics.

Medical : The Medical Authority determined by the agency
in charge of public health affairs in the State.

Disciplinary Body

: The permanent disciplinary board or
disciplinary committee, as the case may be.

the

Chapter II
Job Planning and Organization
Article (2)
The Government Agency shall make optimal utilization of the available human
resources in order to achieve its objectives, develop the individual capabilities
of its employees, provide a safe and fair work environment encouraging the
exceptional devotion, creativity, innovation and cooperation and involve its
employees in developing the work patterns therein.
Article (3)
The Ministry shall prepare a Guide on public positions description,
classification and grading under a resolution issued by the Minister.
Article (4)
The Government Agency shall classify jobs in general groups, including
qualitative groups. Each qualitative group shall contain the jobs that are similar
in the nature of work, the level of duties and responsibilities and the
qualifications required for occupying such jobs.
Each Government Agency shall provide job description, classification and
hierarchy in light of its approved organizational and functional structures and
in accordance with the provisions of the Guide of public positions description,
classification and grading. The job description, classification and hierarchy shall
be approved by the Competent Department. The Executive Regulations hereof
shall determine data that shall be included in the job description.
Article (5)
Each Government Agency shall prepare the functional structure thereof in
proportion to the actual competences and needs thereof in accordance with the
approved organizational structure. The functional structure shall not become
effective unless it is approved by the Minister.

Chapter III
Appointment
Article (6)
Appointment to positions shall be made within the limits of the actual needs of
the Government Agency. Appointment may be made only in case where there is
a vacant position. Priority for appointment shall be given to job seekers whose
names are registered in the Ministry.
Article (7)
Vacant positions shall be filled by appointment, promotion, transfer, placement
or secondment, taking into account that the requirements for the vacant
position are satisfied.
Article (8)
The selection to fill the vacant positions through appointment shall be based on
merit and shall be made through advertisement. The condition of
advertisement may, with the approval of the authority in charge of
appointment, be excluded with respect to jobs the nature of which requires so.
The Executive Regulations hereof shall determine the data which shall be
included in the advertisement.
Article (9)
The instrument of appointment shall be as follows:
1. By a decree issued by the Emir or a decree or resolution issued by the
authority in charge of appointment;
2. Under an employment contract in accordance with the models attached
to the Executive Regulations hereof;
3. By a special employment contract, as an exception to the Grade/Salary
Schedules attached hereto, to appoint the experienced and qualified
persons or those with rare specialties. In such case, appointment shall be
subject to the approval of the Prime Minister; and
4. By a temporary contract with a lump‐sum bonus for a period not
exceeding six months renewable for a similar period.
In all cases, the appointment of the non‐Qatari employees shall be made under
employment contracts.
Article (10)
The Council of Ministers may, upon the proposal of the Government Agency
and after consulting the Ministry, establish regulations for certain positions of a
special nature whereby the job rights and benefits shall be determined for the
occupants of such positions.

Article (11)
The Government Agency may fill some positions by part‐time system in
accordance with the conditions and controls established by a resolution issued
by the Council of Ministers.
Article (12)
The power of appointment in positions shall be as follows:
1. By a decree issued by the Emir with regard to the positions where private
laws provide for the appointment thereto by such instrument;
2. By a decree with regard to the positions of undersecretaries and the
positions where private laws provide for appointment thereto by such
instrument;
3. By a resolution issued by the Prime Minister with regard to the positions
of assistant undersecretaries or the positions where private laws provide
for appointment thereto by such instrument;
4. By a resolution of the Chairman with regard to the first grade positions
and below or under an employment contract concluded with the
employee, subject to the provisions hereof, the approved organizational
and functional structures of the Agency and the Guide on the public
positions description, classification and grading, provided that the
Department provides the Competent Department with a copy of the
appointment resolution, the employment contract or any amendment
made to the contract accompanied by all documents and data necessary
for appointment within a week from the issuance date of the resolution
or the date of signing the contract. The Competent Department may
object to the resolution or the contract, within sixty days as of the
issuance thereof, if it contradicts with the applicable laws and
regulations. In such case, the resolution or the contract shall be deemed
void ab initio.
Article (13)
Whoever is appointed to a position shall satisfy the following requirements:
1. He/she shall be Qatari. If not available, priority shall be given to the sons
of the Qatari women married to non‐Qataris, then the non‐Qataris
married to Qatari nationals, then the nationals of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, then the nationals of the Arab countries and then the other
nationalities;
2. He/she shall not less than eighteen years of age;
3. He/she shall meet the qualifications and requirements needed for the
position;
4. He/she shall pass the tests, competitions and qualification programs
established by the Government Agency;
5. He/she shall be of good conduct and reputation;

6. He shall be medically fit to perform the functions of the nominated
position under a certificate issued by the Competent Medical Authority;
7. He/she has not been sentenced to imprisonment pursuant to a final
judgment in a felony involving moral turpitude, unless he/she has been
rehabilitated;
However, if the judgment is suspended, the employee may be appointed
under the approval of the authority in charge of appointment.
If he/she has been convicted only once, such conviction shall not
prevent the appointment, unless the Department decides, by a reasoned
decision based on the grounds of the judgment and the circumstances of
the incident, that the appoint of such employee contradicts with the
position requirements and the nature of work.
8. He/she has not been dismissed from his/her position under a final
disciplinary judgment or decision, unless a period of at least one year has
passed since the issuance thereof.
Article (14)
The Government Agencies shall provide the jobs prescribed for people with
disabilities in accordance with the provisions of Law No. (2) of 2004 on People
with Special Needs, provide such people with all appropriate means to perform
their job duties and equip their workplaces with the requirements that fit their
own needs.
Article (15)
An employee appointed for the first time shall be subject to a probationary
period of three months renewable for a similar period, commencing from the
effective date of employment. During such period, the appropriateness of the
employee to occupy the position shall be assessed under a report prepared by
the manager of the concerned department and approved by the CEO. If the
employee has been proven to be unsuitable, his/her employment shall be
terminated. No employee may be delegated or seconded during the
probationary period.
Article (16)
If the probationary period has been successfully passed or has been passed
without notifying the employee in writing of the termination of his/her
employment, the employee shall be deemed to be confirmed in the position
and the probationary period shall be counted as part of his/her employment.
On the other hand, if the employee has proven to be unsuitable for performing
the duties of his/her position, a resolution terminating the employment of the
employee shall be issued before the expiration of the probationary period. The
employee shall be informed of such resolution once it is issued. Moreover, the
employee shall not be entitled to receive the end of service allowance for the
unsuccessful probationary period.

Article (17)
Seniority in grade shall be counted from the date of appointment therein. If
more than one employee are appointed in one grade on the same date, seniority
shall be determined amongst themselves as set forth in the Executive
Regulations hereof.
Article (18)
The non‐Qatari employee shall be appointed in accordance with the Guide on
public positions description, classification and grading. The Government
Agency may, as required by the public interest, grant an extraordinary
allowance, provided that the gross salary does not exceed the ceiling set forth in
the Grade/Salary Schedule No. (2) attached hereto.
Article (19)
The employee shall be entitled, upon employment, to receive the initial basic
salary of the grade to which he/she is appointed.
The employee may be appointed with a salary higher than the initial basic
salary prescribed for the grade of his/her position in accordance with the
conditions and controls established by the Executive Regulations hereof.
In all cases, the employee shall be entitled to receive his/her salary from the
effective date of employment.
Article (20)
The employee who has been appointed without holding the required
qualifications and he/she has received his/her qualifications during his/her
employment or the employee who has received a higher qualification during
his/her employment may be re‐appointed to a vacant position in the
Government Agency in which the degree he/her received is a requirement
whenever he/she satisfies the other requirements needed for occupying the
position or upgrading the grade of his/her position in accordance with the
public positions description, classification and grading guide.
The re‐appointment of an employee in accordance with the provisions of the
previous paragraph shall be subject to the prior approval of the Ministry of the
scientific degree required to be held.
The date of re‐appointment, occupancy of the vacant position or upgrading the
grade of the employee's position in accordance with the new grade shall be
from the issuance date of the Chairman's resolution.
Article (21)
The employee whose service has been terminated and he/she has been working
for an agency to which the provisions hereof are applied may be re‐appointed

to his/her previous position or to other position having similar requirements
with the same grade and basic salary he/she has been received at the end of
his/her service in the same Government Agency for which he/she has been
working or any other Government Agency, while keeping a record of the period
he/she spent in his/her previous position for seniority purposes.
If the employee has gained practical experience in another work when he/she
has quitted his/her position, he/she may be re‐appointed to a position with a
higher grade whenever he/she meets the requirements for such position.
The employee re‐appointed to other similar position or a position with a higher
grade shall be subject to a new probationary period of three months,
commencing from the effective date of employment.
Chapter IV
Salaries, Increments, Allowances and other Benefits
Article (22)
The employees' grades and salaries shall be determined in accordance with
Schedules Nos. (1) and (2) attached hereto. Such Schedules may be amended by
virtue of a decree issued by the Emir.
Article (23)
The Qatari employee shall be entitled to a periodic increment after the elapse
of one year from the date of appointment or the due date of the previous
periodic increment, until the employee's salary reaches the maximum pay scale
for his/her grade. The value of the increment shall be calculated in accordance
with the categories set forth in the Grade/Salary Schedule No. (1).
Article (24)
The granting of the periodic increment may not be deferred or withheld, unless
a disciplinary decision is issued by the Disciplinary Body. The decision to defer
or withheld such increment shall entail the loss of the right to receive the
increment during the period set forth in the decision, without having any
impact on the due date of the next increment.
Article (25)
The Qatari employee whose salary has reached the maximum pay scale for
his/her grade shall be granted a monthly bonus equivalent to the category of
the periodic increment of the grade which he/she occupies and specified in the
Grade/Salary Schedule No. (1).
Article (26)
The employee shall be entitled to the following increments, allowances and
compensations:
1. Social increment;

2.
3.
4.
5.

Housing allowance;
Transport allowance;
Representation allowance;
Nature of work allowance in accordance with the controls established
under a resolution issued by the Prime Minister;
6. Special increment;
7. Retention bonus;
8. Extraordinary increment;
9. Telephone allowance;
10. Overtime compensation;
11. Car allowance;
12. Supervisory allowance;
13. Furniture allowance; and
14. Treasury allowance.
The increments and allowances referred to above may be amended or other
increments and allowances may be added thereto by virtue of a resolution of
the Council of Ministers. Subject to Clause (5), the Executive Regulations hereof
shall determine the categories of such increments and allowances and their
eligibility conditions and controls.
Article (27)
Cash advances may be paid to the employees and the Executive Regulations
hereof shall determine such advances' types and values, payment controls and
exemptions.
Article (28)
The Government Agency shall bear the cost of airline tickets of the employee's
official missions in accordance with the conditions and controls determined by
the Executive Regulations hereof.
Article (29)
The Government Agency shall bear the cost of airline tickets of the non‐Qatari
employees in accordance with the conditions and controls determined by the
Executive Regulations hereof.
Chapter V
Training and Development
Article (30)
The Government Agency shall, in coordination with the Ministry, develop a
training plan in accordance with the career path in order to achieve the
objectives thereof within the framework of the general policy of the State and
ensure the development of the performance of the employees thereof by
providing them with appropriate opportunities for training, development and

qualification for the sake of developing and enhancing their capacities and
providing them with new skills that improve their performance of the duties of
their positions and qualify them to assume the duties of a higher position in
accordance with the conditions and controls determined by the Executive
Regulations hereof.
Article (31)
The Department shall implement the annual training and development plan
following the approval of the budget and may, in coordination with the
concerned departments, amend the same in accordance with the work
requirements, provided that such plan does not exceed the approved training
budget.
Except for craft and labor jobs, training courses shall be provided for all
candidates for promotion in order to provide them with the skills and
experiences required for the position to which they are to be promoted.
Article (32)
The period an employee spends in training shall be deemed part of his/her
service period during which he/she enjoys all benefits of his/her job. Failure to
attend the training courses without an excuse accepted by the employer shall
be deemed a breach to the job duties.
Article (33)
The Ministry shall develop scholarship plans to obtain university and higher
degrees in coordination with the government agencies which shall notify the
Ministry of their actual needs for scholarship. The Ministry shall follow up
those who are sent thereby, whether they are employees or candidates for
positions in the government agencies in accordance with such plans and in
coordination with the concerned departments.
Chapter VI
Performance Evaluation System
Article (34)
The Government Agency shall develop a performance evaluation system based
on the performance of the employees and their administrative units and the
nature of activity thereof in order to motivate the individual achievements and
enhance team spirit.
Article (35)
The Competent Department shall establish the general directives for the
employees' performance evaluation.

The evaluation of the employee's performance shall be made annually. The
Executive Regulations hereof shall regulate the rules and the methods to be
followed in the preparation of the performance evaluation reports.
The evaluation performance reports shall be limited to the employees who hold
positions of excellent grade and less.
Article (36)
The evaluation of the employee's performance shall cover a year commencing
from 1st January and ending on 31st December. The performance evaluation
levels shall be as follows:
1. Excellent (90%) and above.
2. Very good above (75%) to below (90 %).
3. Good above (65%) to (75%).
4. Fair from (50%) to (65%).
5. Poor below (50%).
As an exception to the provision of this Article and subject to the provision of
Article (15) hereof, the evaluation of the employee's performance during the
first year of his/her service shall be made in accordance with the period spent
thereby in such year until the end of December as per the averages referred to
in this Article, provided that such period is not less than three months.
Article (37)
The Department shall prepare the sample performance evaluation reports and
obtain the approval of the Competent Department of the same.
Each line manager shall issue performance evaluation reports for his/her
employees in accordance with the approved samples during the first half of
January of each year. The manager's superior may amend the evaluation based
on the reasons expressed thereby in writing before the end of January.
The performance evaluation reports shall be submitted to the CEO for approval
during the first half of February of each year.
Article (38)
If the employee is seconded or delegated inside the State, the final performance
evaluation shall be prepared by the agency in which the employee has spent the
larger period of the year during which his/her performance is to be evaluated.
If the period spent by the employee in his/her original employer is equal to the
period spent thereby in the agency to which the employee is seconded or
delegated, the employee's original employer shall prepare his/her performance
evaluation, provided that the agency to which the employee is seconded or
delegated prepares his/her performance evaluation for the secondment or
placement period and sends the same to his/her original employer for future
reference when preparing the performance evaluation.
Article (39)

The performance evaluation of the employee shall be legally rated "good" in the
following cases:
1. Taking a leave for a period exceeding eighteen months;
2. Delegating the employee to a scholarship or training course abroad for a
period exceeding eighteen months;
3. Seconding the employee to work abroad for a period exceeding eighteen
months; and
4. Being a member in the Central Municipal Council.
If the performance evaluation of the employee before the leave, placement,
secondment or membership is rated "excellent" or "very good", in such case the
previous performance evaluation of such employee shall be legally recognized.
Article (40)
If the employee is transferred from one Government Agency to another or
he/she is re‐appointed without interval, the Agency from which the employee is
transferred or for which he/she has been working before his/her re‐
appointment shall prepare a report on his/her efficiency during the period of
his/her employment therein in the year during which he/she has been
transferred or re‐appointed and shall send such report to the Agency to which
the employee is transferred or in which the employee is re‐appointed for future
reference when preparing the evaluation of his/her performance.
If there is no performance evaluation of the employee re‐appointed in another
Agency for the years before his/her re‐appointment due to the abolition of
his/her previous employer or due to any other reason, in such case the report
on his/her performance evaluation for the first year in which he/she has been
re‐appointed shall be legally recognized as for the years in which he/she has no
performance evaluation.
Article (41)
The performance of the employees of the categories set forth below may not be
rated as "excellent" or "very good":
1. The employee who has a training opportunity during the year in which
the performance evaluation report is to be prepared and he/she does not
successfully pass such training or fails to attend the same without an
excuse accepted by his/her employer;
2. The employee who has been subject to a disciplinary penalty by salary
deduction or suspension from work for a period exceeding ten days or
has been subject to penalties the total of which exceeds the salary
deduction or suspension from work for fifteen days during the year in
which the performance evaluation report is to be prepared or any other
more severe penalty; and
3. The employee who holds a position of the special and excellent grades
and who has been subject to any penalty, except the penalty of warning,

during the year in which the performance evaluation report is to be
prepared.
Article (42)
The employee shall receive a copy of the performance evaluation report once it
is approved. The employee may complain about such report to the Chairman
within fifteen (15) days from the date of being notified thereof. The Chairman
shall decide on the complaint within thirty (30) days from the date of
submission. The expiry of such period without notifying the employee of the
amendment of the report shall be considered an implicit rejection thereof. The
Chairman's decision on the complaint shall be deemed final.
The report shall not be final unless the deadline for submitting a complaint
about such report or deciding thereon has expired.
Article (43)
If the performance evaluation of the employee is rated "poor" for two
consecutive times, he/she may be transferred to another appropriate position in
the Government Agency without reducing his/her salary. If a third report,
immediately following the two previous reports, has rated his/her performance
as "poor", his/her service may be terminated without prejudice to his/her right
to receive pension or the end of service gratuity.
Article (44)
The Chairman may grant an incentive bonus to the employee who provides
distinguished services, works, researches or suggestions that help to improve
the work methods, upgrade the performance or save the expenses, provided
that such bonus does not exceed the gross monthly salary of the employee.
Such bonus shall not be granted more than twice per fiscal year.
The decision to grant the bonus shall include the grounds for granting the
same.
In all cases, such bonus may not be granted, unless the financial provision is
provided.
Article (45)
The Government Agency may grant bonuses in kind to the distinguished
employees or departments if the financial provision is provided, provided that
the value of the bonus does not exceed (QAR 3,000) for the employee or the
department.
Chapter VII
Promotions
Article (46)

Promotion for positions of grades ranging from twelve to excellent shall be
made on the basis of seniority and in accordance with the performance
evaluation.
The employee may only be promoted to a vacant position in the next higher
grade level. Nevertheless, the position may be upgraded to the next higher
grade level and the employee may be promoted thereto, provided that the
required financial provision is provided, subject to the rules of the manual on
public positions description, classification and grading.
The promotion decisions shall be issued by the authority in charge of
appointment. The Department shall provide the Competent Department with a
copy of the promotion decision accompanied by all data and documents
required for promotion within one week from the issuance date thereof. The
Competent Department may object to the promotion decision if it contradicts
with the applicable laws and regulations within sixty (60) days from the
issuance date thereof. In such case, the decision shall be disregarded.
Article (47)
Subject to the provision of Article (31) hereof, promotion on the basis of
seniority with regard to the positions of grades up to the first grade shall satisfy
the condition that the performance of the employee shall not be rated less than
"good" for the last two years; the intermediate period set forth in the manual on
public positions description, classification and grading shall be spent and the
training courses prescribed for the candidates for promotion determined by a
resolution of the Minister in accordance with the national training plan
developed by the Ministry shall be passed.
Promotion to positions of special and first grades shall satisfy the condition that
the performance of the employee shall not be rated less than "very good" for the
last two years in addition to the other conditions set forth in the preceding
paragraph.
Article (48)
The distinguished employee may, under a resolution of the Chairman, be
granted an extraordinary promotion to the next higher grade without
complying with the condition of the intermediate period or the qualification,
provided that the performance of the employee is rated "excellent" in his/her
last two performance evaluation reports; the employee spends in his/her service
a period not less than five years; he/she is not subject to a disciplinary penalty,
unless such penalty is suspended; and the total leaves taken by the employee
during the two years prior to the submission date of the extraordinary
promotion application do not exceed five months, except the periodic and sick
leaves.
The extraordinary promotion shall be made to the positions of first grade and
less.
The extraordinary promotion shall not affect the due date of the promotion on
the basis of seniority whenever the eligibility conditions therefor are satisfied.

The employee may not be granted an extraordinary promotion unless at least
ten years have passed since his/her previous extraordinary promotion, provided
that he/she is not be granted more than two extraordinary promotions during
his/her service.
Article (49)
Upon promotion, Qatari employees occupying positions of first grade and less
shall be entitled to the minimum pay scale of the grade to which he/she is
promoted or the salary he/she has received before promotion, plus a periodic
increment of the categories specified to the grade to which he/she is promoted,
whichever is higher, in accordance with what is set forth in Grade/Salary
Schedule No. (1), provided that it does not exceed the maximum scale for the
grade to which he/she is promoted.
Article (50)
The promotion shall not affect the due date of the periodic increment,
whenever the eligibility conditions therefor are satisfied.
Chapter VIII
Transfer, Placement and Secondment
Article (51)
Subject to the provisions of the manual on public positions description,
classification and grading, the employee may be transferred from one
Government Agency to another in order to achieve the public interest, provided
that the approval of the two competent chairmen is obtained.
The transfer from one position to another inside the Government Agency shall
be made under the resolution of the Chairman.
Article (52)
The employee may only be transferred to a vacant position of the same grade,
provided that he/she satisfies the requirements for such position.
The transfer shall not affect the rights that the employee enjoys on the date of
his/her transfer except those related to the nature of work.
Article (53)
The employee may be delegated, under a resolution of the Chairman, to
temporarily perform the duties of another position of the same grade or the
next higher grade in the Government Agency where he/she works. Moreover,
placement may be made in addition to the employee's original work.
The placement shall be made for a period not exceeding one year renewable for
other similar period(s) up to a maximum of three years.
The employee shall not be entitled to an allowance for such placement.

Article (54)
The employee may be delegated to perform the duties of a position in another
Government Agency. In such case, the placement shall be made upon the
request of the Agency to which the employee is delegated and shall be subject
to the approval of the two competent chairmen.
The placement shall be made for a period not exceeding one year renewable for
other similar period(s) up to a maximum of three years. The placement shall be
made under a resolution of the Prime Minister if it exceeds such period.
The Agency from which the employee is delegated shall pay the employee's
basic salary and all his/her entitlements related to his/her original position
throughout the placement period and the Agency to which the employee is
delegated shall pay the placement allowance.
Article (55)
Subject to the provisions of the preceding Article, the delegated employee shall
be entitled to a monthly placement allowance in accordance with the controls
determined by the Executive Regulations hereof.
Article (56)
The employee may, under a resolution of the Chairman and after obtaining the
employee's approval, be seconded to any other government agencies,
companies in which the State owns stakes, sports organizations, private
institutions of public benefit and associations and their equivalents or
companies offering their shares for public subscription for a period of one year
renewable for a similar period(s) up to a maximum of six (6) years.
The employee may be seconded from the companies, institutions and
associations referred to in the preceding paragraph to the government agencies,
provided that the Government Agency obtains the approval of the Prime
Minister of the secondment.
Article (57)
The Agency to which the employee is seconded shall pay the salary of the
position to which the employee is seconded in addition to all of its other
entitlements and benefits. The seconded employee may, after obtaining the
approval of the Prime Minister, be granted his/her gross salary which he/she
receives from his/her employer from which he/she is seconded if his/her gross
salary exceeds the pay scale set forth in Grade/Salary Schedules Nos. (1) and (2)
attached hereto.
Article (58)

By virtue of a resolution of the Prime Minister and based on the proposal of the
Chairman, the employee may be seconded, subject to his/her approval, to an
agency affiliated to the Arab, foreign or international governments, bodies or
organizations.
The secondment decision may include the continuation of payment of all or
some of the gross salary to the seconded employee in addition to the payment
of the entitlements and benefits of his/her previous position by the agency from
which he/she is seconded as per the exigencies of the public interest.
Article (59)
The Executive Regulations hereof shall determine the detailed rules and
provisions governing the transfer, placement and secondment.

Chapter IX
Leaves
Article (60)
Weekly working days, working hours, public and weekly holidays and
organization of work during such days shall be determined by a Resolution of
the Council of Ministers, upon the recommendation of the Minister, as per the
exigencies of the public interest. An employee may be absent from his/her work
only during leaves approved in accordance with the provisions hereof. In the
event where the interval between two public holidays is one working day, it
shall be deemed as a day off.
Article (61)
Leaves shall be as follows:
1. Periodic leave;
2. Personal leave;
3. Sick leave;
4. Accouchement leave;
5. Maternity leave;
6. Hajj leave;
7. Marriage leave;
8. Iddah leave;
9. Bereavement leave;
10. Leave for accompanying a spouse;
11. Muharram (unmarriageable person) leave;
12. Leave for accompanying a patient;
13. Exceptional sabbatical leave;
14. Study leave;
15. Examinations leave;
16. Leave without pay.

The Council of Ministers may determine any other leave.
The leaves provided for in this Article shall be counted as part of the actual
service period of the employee. If the total leaves without pay exceed one year,
the period in excess shall not be counted as part of the actual service period of
the employee, except for leaves determined by the Executive Regulations of this
Law.
Article (62)
The employee shall be entitled to a fully paid periodic leave per year, in
accordance with the following:
1. (45) days for the employees who hold positions of the seventh grade or
above or the equivalent;
2. (40) days for the employees who hold positions of the eighth to the
tenth grade or the equivalent;
3. (30) days for the employees who hold positions of other grades or the
equivalent.
The employee shall be entitled to a periodic leave for any part of the year, after
successfully passing the probationary period until the end of the fiscal year.
If public holidays or sick days fall during the periodic leave, the same number of
such days shall be added to his/her leave.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the Council of Ministers shall issue a
resolution to regulate the periodic leave of the government agencies whose
work nature requires a special regulation.
Article (63)
The Government Agency shall encourage its employees to take their periodic
leaves on an annual basis. If the employee is unable to take all his/her periodic
leave due to the necessary requirements of work, he/she shall take at least half
of the periodic leave, whether consecutive or inconsecutive, and the remaining
leave balance shall be carried forward to and used during the following year
only. The employee may not receive a cash allowance, during the service,
against his/her unused annual leave balance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding Paragraph, the person who
holds craft and labor jobs may carry forward all his/her periodic leave to the
following year only.
Article (64)
Subject to the provisions of the preceding Article, a leave grant equal to one‐
month basic salary for each year shall be paid to the Qatari employee. The
Qatari employee's right to such grant shall be extinguished when he/she takes
any leave exceeding one year, except for the sick leave.
Article (65)

The employee shall be entitled to an personal leave due to an emergency for a
period of no more than seven working days per year. The employee's right to
such leave shall be extinguished after the elapse of the fiscal year for which the
leave is due.
Article (66)
The employee who is absent from work due to sickness shall visit the nearest
medical authority for medical examination and obtaining the necessary sick
leave report. The employee shall inform his/her employer of the medical report.
The employee shall be authorized by the medical authority to take a sick leave
for a period of no more than three consecutive working days at a time and up to
ten working days per year. If the granted leave exceeds the maximum period
referred to, the sick leave shall be granted under a report of the competent
medical authority.
Article (67)
If the employee gets sick while he/she is abroad to spend a periodic leave or
perform an official duty, he/she shall obtain a medical report on his/her
condition, certified by the diplomatic mission, if any, and the employee shall
submit the report to the employer, upon his/her return from abroad, to refer it
to the competent medical authority for approval and determining the duration
of sick leave granted to him/her.
Article (68)
The competent medical authority shall grant the employee who is infected with
a contagious disease a sick leave, even if the disease does not prevent the
employee from performing his/her work, until a report of his/her recovery is
issued by the competent medical authority. Further, it shall notify the
Government Agency to which the employee is affiliated that the employee shall
not be allowed to work throughout such period. In the cases where the
employee's recovery is hopeless, the competent medical authority shall state
the same in its report on the employee.
Article (69)
In case of sickness, the employee shall be granted a fully paid sick leave for no
more than one year. If he/she does not recover, the competent medical
authority may grant him/her a sick leave with a half salary for no more than
further year. In the event where the competent medical authority deems that
he/she is incurable and unfit to carry on with his/her job, the employee shall be
superannuated for being medically unfit, if he/she is Qatari, and his/her service
shall be terminated if he/she is non‐Qatari.
Article (70)

If the employee exhausts all his/her sick leaves set forth in the preceding Article
without being cured, he/she may use the balance of his/her periodic leave.
Article (71)
Without prejudice to the provisions of the two preceding Articles, the employee
who suffers from a work‐related injury or occupational disease shall be granted
a fully paid sick leave for no more than one year, which shall not be deducted
from his/her periodic or sick leaves. If such period expires without recovery,
he/she shall be referred to the competent medical authority to consider the
termination of his/her service if non‐Qatari or grant him/her a fully paid sick
leave for another year if Qatari. If such period expires without recovery, he/she
shall be superannuated for being medically unfit.
In application of the provisions of this Law, a work‐related injury means any
injury caused by an accident that occurs during or as a result of the
performance of the work, without fault or negligence on the part of the
employee, or any occupational disease.
Any accident that occurs to the employee while going to or returning from
work shall be deemed as a work‐related injury.
An occupational disease means any disease that is commonly encountered
among the employees of one profession or a group of certain professions, in
accordance with Schedule (3) attached to this Law.
Article (72)
In the event where the employee gets sick during the probationary period, the
probationary period shall be extended to such a period equal to the sickness
period, provided that the employee's sickness does not exceed the probationary
period. In order to be granted a sick leave, the employee shall obtain a
certificate from the competent medical authority.
If an accouchement leave or Iddah leave falls during the probationary period, it
shall not be counted within the probationary period.
Article (73)
The female employee shall be granted a fully paid accouchement leave for two
months which shall not be deducted from the other leaves, provided that she
submits a supporting medical report or a true copy of the birth certificate. In
case of giving birth to twins, the leave duration shall be three months.
The female employee shall be entitled, upon her request, to obtain her balance
of periodic leaves along with her accouchement leave.
Article (74)
The Qatari female employee may be granted a fully paid leave to take care of
her children with disability or with conditions requiring ongoing care of the

mother, based upon a report of the competent medical authority, under the
approval of the Chairman for a maximum of five years, and under the approval
of the Prime Minister in case of exceeding such period.
The Qatari female employee may be granted a leave in other cases in
accordance with the conditions and regulations established by a resolution of
the Council of Ministers.
Article (75)
The Muslim employee shall be granted once, throughout his/her service, a fully
paid leave for twenty‐one days to perform the Hajj. This leave shall not be
deducted from the periodic leaves due to the employee.
Article (76)
The employee shall be granted a fully paid marriage leave for fifteen days,
provided that he/she submits a true copy of the marriage contract.
Article (77)
The Muslim female employee whose husband dies shall be granted a fully paid
Iddah leave for a period of four months and ten days as of the date of death of
her husband or until she gives birth in the event where she is pregnant. This
period shall not be deducted from her other leaves and the female employee or
her representative shall notify her employer of the death of her husband and
provide the employer with the supporting document of his death.
Article (78)
The Executive Regulations of this Law shall determine the other conditions and
controls for granting the leaves provided for in the previous Articles of this
Chapter, and determine the duration, conditions and controls for granting the
following leaves:
1. Bereavement leave;
2. Leave for accompanying a spouse;
3. Muharram (unmarriageable person) leave;
4. Leave for accompanying a patient;
5. Exceptional sabbatical leave;
6. Study leave;
7. Examinations leave;
8. Leave without pay
Chapter X
Job Obligations, Prohibited Activities and Disciplinary Accountability
Article (79)
The employee shall:

1. comply with the provisions of the applicable laws, regulations,
resolutions and rules and seek to implement the same;
2. perform the work assigned to him/her by himself/herself carefully and
conscientiously and accomplish the same in a timely manner in
accordance with the prescribed performance rates;
3. abide by the official working hours and allocate the same to perform the
job duties;
The Director of the Administrative Unit may grant the employee
permission for late attendance, leaving the workplace during the official
working hours or early leaving the workplace, provided that the
permission period does not exceed two hours at a time and a maximum
of seven hours per month. If the permission period exceeds the
maximum referred to above, the permission shall be granted under the
written approval of the Chairman or the CEO.
4. preserve the dignity and good reputation of the job and have a good
appearance;
5. cooperate with his/her superiors and colleagues at work;
6. perform any tasks assigned to him/her even outside the official working
hours when the job interests require so;
7. preserve the government immovable and movable properties and
properly use the necessary tools to perform the job;
8. use the work‐related safety and protection means and abide by the safety
guidelines to preserve his/her life and health as well as the life, health,
and properties of others.
Article (80)
The employee shall be prohibited from:
1. violation of the applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and rules;
2. committing any act or omission to act intentionally or negligently,
which contradicts with the job requirements, duties or responsibilities or
results in the loss of a right of the State or a Government Agency;
3. disclosure of any information to which the employee has access by virtue
of his/her job if it is confidential by its nature or pursuant to instructions
requiring so, without the Chairman's written permission. This obligation
shall survive the termination of service;
4. keeping for himself/herself an original or copy of any official paper or
document or removing the same from its dedicated folders, even if
related to a work assigned to him/her;
5. signing any petitions or letters that would undermine the reputation of
the State or belonging to any prohibited organization, body, or group;
6. performing any paid or unpaid work, even outside the official working
hours, for third party without getting the prior written permission of the
CEO. However, the employee may handle paid guardianship, custodian,
trusteeship or agency activities if the interned person, minor, or absent
person is a relative or kin up to the fourth degree. The employee may
also administer the Waqf if the owner of the Waqf designates him/her as

such, and perform the activities of the receivership on the funds in
which he/she is a partner or has any interest or which are owned by any
of his/her relatives up to the fourth degree. In all cases, the employee
shall notify the employer thereof and the notice shall be kept in his/her
service file;
7. combining more than one job in government agencies without obtaining
the approval of the Prime Minister;
8. engaging in any business or trade that contradicts with his/her duties as
an employee of the Government Agency or with the Government
Agency's interest or that might give the employee a direct or indirect
interest in any contracts, activities, or tenders related to the activities of
the Government Agency or to which the Government Agency is a party;
9. abuse of his/her power and influence on his/her subordinates or inciting
them to violate the provisions of the applicable laws, regulations,
resolutions and rules;
10. Acceptance of gifts, donations, favors, grants, cash amounts or other
gratuities, personally or through any other person, from any person in
consideration of or because of any activity related to his/her job, in order
to achieve an interest for third parties.
Article (81)
The employee shall avoid any work that might constitute a conflict of interests
between his/her personal activities and the interests and projects of the
Government Agency, or that might influence directly or indirectly a personal
interest or the interest of any of the employee's relatives up to the fourth
degree.
Article (82)
Any employee who violates his/her obligations, commits any of the
prohibitions set forth in this Law or breaches the requirements of his/her job
shall be disciplined, without prejudice to his/her civil or criminal liability as
necessary.
The employee shall not be relieved of liability for any act or omission to act in
violation of the provisions of this Law and its Executive Regulations, based on
an order given to the employee by his/her superior unless it is proven that the
violation is committed pursuant to a written order given to the employee by
his/her superior despite the fact that the employee has alerted the superior in
writing about such violation. In this case, the person issuing the order shall
solely bear the liability, unless the order issued by the superior involves a crime.
In such case, the subordinate shall also be held liable, in accordance with the
provisions of the criminal liability.
Article (83)

The legal department or a legal expert in the Government Agency shall conduct
the investigations in the violations attributed to any of the employees in the
agency, under the approval of the Chairman or the CEO. The investigation shall
be established in a report with a serial number, in which the date, place, and
time of conducting the investigation, the time of its completion, the names of
the investigator and the investigation clerk shall be mentioned and each of the
investigation papers shall be signed by them.
In all cases, the job grade of the investigator shall not be less than that of the
employee referred to investigation. If this condition is not met by any of the
employees of the legal department, the Chairman shall assign one of the
Government Agency's employees, who meets this condition to conduct the
investigation.
Article (84)
No disciplinary penalty may be imposed on the employee before conducting
written investigations with him/her, hearing his/her statements and realizing
his/her defense as indicated in the Executive Regulations of this Law. The
decision issued to impose a penalty on the employee shall be reasoned.
As for imposing the penalties of warning and salary deduction of not more than
three days on an employee who occupies the fourth grade position and less or
its equivalent in terms of salary, the investigation may be conducted orally,
provided that its content is established in the penalty decision. In this case, the
penalty decision shall be issued by the manager of the department where the
employee works.
The employee may complain about such decision to the CEO within thirty (30)
days as of the date of being notified thereof. The CEO shall decide on the
complaint within no more than sixty (60) days as of the date of submission. The
expiry of such period without deciding on the complaint shall be considered an
implicit rejection thereof.
Article (85)
The CEO, having reviewed the investigation, may order to close the
investigation, refer the employee to the competent Disciplinary Body for
accountability, or just impose a penalty on the employee in accordance with the
following:
1. For the employees who hold positions of the second grade and less:
a. Warning;
b. Deduction from the salary of a period of no more than forty‐five
(45) days a year, provided that such deduction does not exceed
the value of a fifteen‐day salary at a time.
2. For the employees who hold positions of the grades ranging from an
assistant undersecretary to the first grade or the equivalent thereof in
terms of salary:
a. Notice;
b. Admonition;

c. Deduction from the salary of a period of no more than twenty
days a year, provided that such deduction does not exceed the
value of a three‐day salary at a time.
The employee may complain about the disciplinary penalty decision to the
Chairman within thirty (30) days as of the date of being notified thereof. The
Chairman shall decide on the complaint within no more than sixty (60) days as
of the date of submission. The expiry of such period without deciding on the
complaint shall be considered an implicit rejection thereof.
Article (86)
The CEO may suspend the employee referred to investigation from work, if the
interest of the investigation requires so, while the employee shall continue to
receive his/her full salary.
The suspension period shall not exceed thirty (30) days except by the decision
of the Disciplinary Body.
Article (87)
Any employee who is remanded or imprisoned for the execution of a judicial
order or judgment shall be suspended by the force of law from his/her work
throughout the period of imprisonment.
The employee shall receive his/her full salary in the first case and half of the
basic salary in the second case while preserving the social allowance.
When the employee returns to work, the matter shall be referred to the
Chairman to decide upon the employee's disciplinary accountability.
Article (88)
In the event where it is ordered to refer the employee to the Disciplinary Body,
the file of the violations attributed to the employee and the relevant
investigations shall be referred to the Chairman of such Disciplinary Body.
The Chairman of the Disciplinary Body shall call the Disciplinary Body for a
meeting within a period of no more than seven (7) days as of the date of
referral.
Article (89)
The disciplinary penalties which may be imposed on the employee shall be as
follows:
First: For the employees who hold positions of the second grade and less:
1. Warning;
2. Deduction from the salary of a period of no more than forty‐five
(45) days a year, provided that such deduction does not exceed
the value of a fifteen‐day salary at a time;
3. Depriving the employee of the periodic increment or postponing
the same for no more than six (6) months;

4. Suspension from work and deduction of half of the salary for no
more than three (3) months;
5. Depriving the employee from the promotion for no more than
one year;
6. Degrading the employee by one grade while the employee is paid
his/her salary he/she received upon issuing the penalty decision;
7. Reducing the salary to no more than the maximum pay scale for
the lower grade;
8. Degrading the employee by one grade and reducing the salary to
that of the lower grade;
9. Dismissal from service while preserving the right of the employee
to pension or end of service gratuity.
Second: For the employees who hold positions of the grades ranging from an
assistant undersecretary to the first grade or the equivalent thereof in terms of
salary:
1. Notice;
2. Admonition;
3. Deduction from the salary of a period of no more than forty‐five
(45) days a year, provided that such deduction does not exceed
the value of a fifteen‐day salary at a time;
4. Depriving the employee of the periodic increment or postponing
the same for no more than six (6) months;
5. Suspension from work and deduction of half of the salary for no
more than three (3) months;
6. Degrading the employee by one grade while the employee is paid
his/her salary he/she received upon issuing the penalty decision;
7. Reducing the salary to no more than the maximum pay scale for
the lower grade;
8. Degrading the employee by one grade and reducing the salary to
that of the lower grade;
9. Dismissal from service while preserving the right of the employee
to pension or end of service gratuity
It shall be prohibited to impose more than one penalty for the same violation.
Article (90)
There shall be formed, in every Government Agency, a committee to be known
as the "Disciplinary Committee" by the decision of the Chairman. Such
Committee shall be composed of a chairman and two members holding
positions not less than the second grade and one of the two members shall
represent the Department while the other shall represent the Legal Affairs Unit.
The Committee shall have the following competences:
1. Disciplining the employees who hold positions of the second grade and
less and imposing the appropriate penalty thereon;
2. Considering the suspension of the employees referred for accountability
before it and the extension of their suspension, whether the suspension
is under a resolution issued by the Committee or by the CEO.

The meeting of the Disciplinary Committee shall not be valid unless attended
by the Chairman and the members. The Committee shall issue its resolutions
by the majority of votes.
Article (91)
The employee may complain about the resolution of the Disciplinary
Committee to the Chairman within thirty (30) days as of the date of being
notified thereof. The Chairman shall decide on the complaint within no more
than sixty (60) days as of the date of submission. The expiry of such period
without deciding on the complaint shall be considered an implicit rejection
thereof.
The Administrative Circuit of the Court of First Instance shall be competent to
hear the appeal against the decision issued by the Chairman on the complaint.
Article (92)
The Permanent Disciplinary Council shall be formed from the Minister as
Chairman, the Undersecretary of the Ministry as Vice‐Chairman, and the
following members:
1. A judge at the Court of Appeal, to be nominated by the President of the
Supreme Judiciary Council;
2. A representative of the State Audit Bureau, who holds at least the
position of a manager of department, to be nominated by the Chairman
of the State Audit Bureau.
3. A representative of the Ministry of Justice, who holds at least the
position of a manager of department, to be nominated by the Minister of
Justice.
The meeting of the Council shall not be valid unless attended by the Chairman
or Vice‐Chairman and the members.
The Council shall issue its resolution by the majority of votes. In case of equal
votes, the Chairman shall have a casting vote.
The Council shall have its headquarters in the Ministry and the Secretariat of
the Council shall consist of employees of the Ministry.
The Prime Minister shall issue a resolution, every three years, to nominate the
members representing the concerned bodies and determine the remuneration
of the chairman, members, and Secretariat of the Council.
Article (93)
The Permanent Disciplinary Council shall have the following competences:
1. Disciplining the employees who hold positions of the grades ranging
from an assistant undersecretary to the first grade and imposing the
appropriate penalty thereon;
2. Considering the suspension of the employees referred for accountability
before it and the extension of their suspension, whether the suspension
is under a resolution issued by the CEO or by the Council.

Article (94)
The jurisdiction of the Disciplinary Body shall be determined in accordance
with the job grade of the employee at the time of referring for interrogation. If
there are more than one employee referred for interrogation and they are
subject to more than one Disciplinary Body in accordance with their job grades,
the jurisdiction shall be held by the Disciplinary Body competent to interrogate
the employee with the highest grade.
Article (95)
The employee shall be notified of a copy of the referral decision and of the date
of the interrogation session at least fifteen days prior to the session date.
The notice shall be served on the employee in person at his/her workplace,
failing which the notice shall be sent to him/her by registered mail with
acknowledgment of receipt to the address registered in his/her file of service or
by one of modern electronic means.
Article (96)
The Disciplinary Body may, sua sponte, or upon the request of the employee
referred to it, conduct the investigation by itself or entrust it to any of its
members.
The party that conducts the investigation shall interrogate the employee,
review all the papers which the investigator deems necessary for the interest of
the investigation even if they are confidential, and hear the witnesses from
among the employees and others.
If the witness who is an employee fails to appear for testimony before the
Disciplinary Body, after postponing procedures and being notified of the new
date of the session, or if the witness appears but abstains from testifying
without an acceptable excuse, or provides a false testimony, the Disciplinary
Body may, after conducting investigation with him/her, without prejudice to
the criminal liability, impose one of the following penalties:
1. Notice, admonition or deduction from the salary of no more than fifteen
(15) days, for the employees who hold positions of the grades ranging from
an assistant undersecretary to the second grade or the equivalent thereof
in terms of salary;
2. Warning or deduction from the salary of a period of no more than fifteen
(15) days, for the employees who hold positions of the third grade and less.
The violating employee may attend all the investigation procedures and
interrogation sessions, unless the interest of the investigation or interrogation
requires holding such sessions in his/her absence.
However, he/she shall be entitled to review the conducted investigations and
all the relevant papers and to obtain a copy thereof.
Article (97)

All the sessions of the Disciplinary Body shall be secret. The Disciplinary Body
shall issue its resolution after hearing the defense of the employee who shall be
the last one to talk.
The employee shall appear in person before the Disciplinary Body. He/she shall
be entitled to request to summon the witnesses for hearing their statements, to
submit his/her defense in writing or to seek the assistance of whomever he/she
wishes to attend and submit the defense on his/her behalf.
However, the Disciplinary Body shall be entitled to request the attendance of
the employee in person.
Article (98)
The Disciplinary Body may hold the employee accountable in absentia and
impose the appropriate penalty on him/her if the latter fails to attend the
interrogation sessions without an acceptable excuse and despite being notified
thereof in writing.
Article (99)
The resolutions of the Disciplinary Body shall be reasoned and signed by the
Chairman and the members.
The employee shall be notified of a copy of the resolution within no more than
seven (7) days as of the date of its issuance. The notice shall be served directly
on him/her at his/her workplace, failing which the notice shall be sent to
him/her by registered mail with acknowledgment of receipt to the address
registered in his/her file of service or by one of modern electronic means.
Article (100)
The employee who is referred to disciplinary interrogation or criminal trial or
who is suspended from work may not be promoted during the period of referral
or suspension.
If the interrogation or trial procedures last for more than one year and the
employee is proved not to be guilty, or the penalty of notice, warning or
deduction of no more than eight days is imposed on him/her, his/her seniority
in the grade to which he/she is promoted shall be calculated from the date of
his/her entitlement to promotion to the new grade.
Article (101)
The employee who was subject to any of the disciplinary penalties set out as
follows, shall not be promoted before the expiry of the following periods:
1. Three months, in case of deduction from salary of more than eight days
to fifteen days;
2. Six months, in case of deduction from salary of more than fifteen days;
3. The period of postponing or depriving of his/her increment;

4. Two years, in the case of reducing the job grade and/or salary.
The duration of the previous service of the employee shall be taken into
account in terms of his/her seniority standing in the grade to which he/she is
degraded.
The duration of the postponement provided for in this Article shall be counted
as of the date of imposing the penalty even if it interferes with another duration
resulting from another penalty.
The employee's promotion shall not be considered during the execution of a
criminal sentence.
Article (102)
If the Disciplinary Body decides to dismiss the employee while he/she is
suspended from work, his/her service shall be deemed to have been terminated
as of the date of his/her suspension, unless the Disciplinary Body decides
otherwise.
Article (103)
The end of service of the employee for any reason whatsoever, except for death,
shall not prevent the disciplinary interrogation, in the event where the
investigation has commenced before the end of his/her service.
However, when the violations result in loss of any of the rights of the Public
Treasury, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary interrogation, even if the
investigation has not commenced prior to the end of service, such interrogation
may be carried out during 5 years as of the end of his/her service.
The employee whose service is terminated may be subject to fine of no less than
(1,000) one thousand Riyals and of no more than the value of the gross salary
paid to the employee during the last three months of his/her service.
The resolution of the Disciplinary Body regarding the imposition of the fine
shall have the power of an executive document.
Article (104)
The right to disciplinary interrogation shall elapse by three years as of the date
of the violation.
The period of limitation is interrupted by the investigation procedures or the
referral of the employee to disciplinary interrogation, without prejudice to the
provisions of the second Paragraph of the previous Article.
The period of limitation resumes as new from the date when the last procedure
was taken with respect to the violation.
In the event where several employees are referred to disciplinary interrogation,
the interruption of the period of limitation for one of them results in the
interruption of such period for the others, even if no interruption measures are
taken against them.

However, if the violation is a criminal offense, the period of limitation for
disciplinary interrogation shall not elapse unless the criminal action is abated.
The disciplinary procedures shall be abated by the death of the employee.
Article (105)
In the cases where it is decided to refer the employee to criminal trial, the
disciplinary procedures shall be suspended until the competent court issues a
final judgment.
Afterwards, the papers shall be returned to the agency to which the employee
belongs, in order to submit them to the Chairman to take a decision on the
disciplinary procedures.
Article (106)
Disciplinary penalties imposed on the employee shall be wiped off
automatically by the expiry of the following periods:
1. Three months, in case of notice, warning, admonition or deduction from
the salary of no more than eight days;
2. Six months, in case of deduction from salary of more than eight days;
3. One year in case of postponing or depriving of his/her periodic
increment;
4. Two years, in the case of the other penalties, except for the dismissal.
When the penalty is wiped off, it shall be considered as if it were not imposed
and shall not affect the rights and condensation due to the employee as a result
thereof, and the penalty papers, any reference thereto and related matters shall
be removed from the employee's service file.
Chapter XI
End of Service
Article (107)
The service of the employee shall end for one of the following reasons:
1. Reaching the age of sixty;
2. Expiration of the contract term;
3. Resignation;
4. Medical incapacity;
5. Disciplinary dismissal;
6. Dismissal by a resolution of the Prime Minister for reasons related to
public interest;
7. Delivering a final judgment against the employee in a crime involving
moral turpitude or dishonesty. However, if the judgment is suspended or
is issued for the first time against the employee, the service of the latter
shall not end unless the Government Agency issues a reasoned decision
based on the grounds of the judgment and merits of the case to dismiss
him/her as his/her existence might be inconsistent with the job
requirements or nature;

8. Loss of the Qatari citizenship;
9. Death.
Article (108)
The service of the employee, after reaching the age specified for the end of
service, may be extended for public interest considerations.
The extension on a year‐by‐year basis shall be determined by a decision of the
authority concerned with appointment, provided that it does not exceed five
years. The Prime Minister shall issue a resolution to extend the service beyond
such period as necessary. The extension of the service of Undersecretaries shall
be under an Emiri Decree.
Article (109)
The employee may resign from his/her job. The authority concerned with the
acceptance of the resignation shall be the appointment authority, provided that
the resignation is submitted in writing, does not include any condition or
restriction, and contains the date of the end of service.
The resignation request shall be settled within thirty (30) days as of the date of
submission, otherwise it shall be considered to be accepted by law. However,
the acceptance of the resignation during this period may be postponed for a
similar period for reasons related to the interest of work.
If the employee is referred to disciplinary interrogation, his/her resignation
shall be accepted only after a decision is issued regarding the penalty to be
imposed other than the dismissal.
Article (110)
The employee shall continue his/her work until he/she receives a notice of the
acceptance of his/her resignation or until the elapse of the duration provided
for in the previous article.
Article (111)
The employee shall be deemed to have resigned in the following cases:
1. In the event where the employee is absent from work without a
permission for fifteen consecutive days, even if this happens after an
authorized leave, unless he/ she presents within the following fifteen
days an acceptable justification. In this case, the CEO shall be entitled to
not deprive him/her of his/her salary for the period of absence if he/she
has a balance of leaves, otherwise, the employee shall be deprived of
his/her salary for such period. If the employee fails to present any
reasons to justify the absence or if he/she presents such reasons but they
were rejected, the service shall be deemed as terminated as of the day
the employee stopped showing up for work.

2. In the event where the employee is absent from work for an
inconsecutive period exceeding thirty (30) days a year without the
permission of the employer. In such case, the service shall be deemed as
terminated as of the day following the completion of this period.
3. In the event where the seconded employee does not show up for work
within 15 days from the expiration of the period specified by the
Executive Regulations of this Law, unless the employee presents a
justification within the following fifteen days. If the employee fails to
present such justification or if he/she presents such reasons but they
were rejected, the service shall be deemed as terminated as of the end of
the secondment.
In the three previous cases, the employee shall be notified in writing of
the legal effect of his/her absence from work. The notice shall be given
after five days of absence from work in the first case, and after ten days
in the second and third cases. The notice shall be sent to him/her to the
address registered in his/her file of service or by one of modern
electronic means.
4. In the event where the employee joins any foreign party for work
without the authorization of the competent authority. In this case, the
employee's service shall be deemed as terminated as of the date of
joining the foreign party.
Article (112)
The Chairman may issue a decision to retain the employee after the end of
his/her service for a period of no more than one month to hand over his/her
custody. This period may be extended for another month if the interest of the
work requires so.
The employee shall be paid for this period remuneration equal to his/her gross
salary.
Article (113)
The medical incapacity shall be proved under a report of the competent
medical authority, upon the request of the employee or the employer. The
service of the employee shall not be terminated for medical incapacity before
the exhaustion of the leaves to which the employee is entitled, except by
his/her consent, provided that the employee obtains compensation for the
same before the end of the service.
Article (114)
Subject to the provisions of Article (102) of this Law, if it is decided to dismiss
the employee on a disciplinary basis, the employee shall be entitled to the gross
salary until the date he/ she is informed of such decision.
Article (115)

In the event of the employee's death, the Government Agency shall pay at once
the gross salary for the month in which the employee died, and the next three
months.
The amounts referred to in this Article shall be deemed as a grant and not as
part of the End of Service Gratuity. In any case, such amounts shall not be
subject to lien or set‐off from any amounts that might be due to the
Government Agency from the deceased employee.
Article (116)
The Government Agency shall bear the expenses of preparing and transferring
the body of the non‐Qatari employee, who dies during his/her employment
with the Government Agency, to his/her homeland, along with a travel ticket to
one of the deceased's relatives residing in the State or from abroad to
accompany the body.
Chapter XII
End of Service Gratuity
Article (117)
The Qatari employee who has spent at least one year working for the
Government Agency shall be entitled to an End of Service Gratuity that shall be
calculated as follows:
1. A basic salary of one month for every year of the first five years.
2. A basic salary of one month and a half for every year of the following five
years.
3. A basic salary of two months for every year after the first ten years.
It is required for the employee's entitlement to such Gratuity that the employee
shall not be entitled to a pension under the provisions of Law No. (24) of 2002
on Retirement and Pensions, unless the actual service exceeds twenty years but
does not exceed thirty years. In such case, he/she shall receive, in addition to
the pension due to him/her, the End of Service Gratuity for the period in excess
of twenty years, to be calculated based on one‐month basic salary for each year
of extra years. If this period exceeds thirty years, the End of Service Gratuity
shall be two months' basic salary for each year in excess of the thirty years. The
provision of this Paragraph shall apply as of 06/03/2003.
The last basic salary received by the employee shall be deemed as the basis to
calculate this End of Service Gratuity.
Leaves without pay shall not be counted upon the calculation of the End of
Service Gratuity, in cases determined by the Executive Regulations of this Law.
Article (118)
The non‐Qatari employee who has spent at least one year working for the
Government Agency shall be entitled to an End of Service Gratuity on the basis
of one month's salary for each year of service up to a maximum of ten months,

throughout his/her service in the State, whether consecutive or inconsecutive.
The last basic salary received by the employee prior to the date of entry into
force of this Law shall be deemed as the basis to calculate the End of Service
Gratuity for the years prior to this date. The basic salary in each year shall be
deemed as the basis to calculate the End of Service Gratuity for the subsequent
years.
Article (119)
The End of Service Gratuity of the non‐Qatari employee for periods prior to the
date of entry into force of Repealed Law No. (10) of 1994 Amending Certain
Provisions of the Civil Service Law shall be calculated on the basis of the last
basic salary received by the employee on 31/03/1994.
Article (120)
The employee shall be entitled to the End of Service Gratuity for any part of the
year, in accordance with the rates referred to in the previous three Articles.
Chapter XIII
General Provisions
Article (121)
The Chairman, CEO, assistant undersecretaries and department managers may
delegate some of their powers or the duties assigned to them under the
provisions of this Law to employees of the immediate lower grade, as required
by the interest of work.
Article (122)
If a supervisory position employee is absent, he/she shall be replaced with the
employee who follows him/her in terms of the order of seniority, to perform
his/her job duties and responsibilities, unless the Chairman determines the
substitute, provided that he/she occupies an equivalent position in terms of the
grade or occupies a position in the immediate lower grade than that of the
absent employee.
Article (123)
The Government Agency shall provide medical care to its employees and their
family members, in accordance with the health system in force in the State.
Article (124)
The Executive Regulations of this Law shall regulate the occupational health
and safety procedures.

Article (125)
In the event where the employee dies or becomes totally or partially disabled,
while performing his/her job or because of it, the employee or his/her heirs, as
the case may be, shall be entitled to compensation for the death or the work‐
related injury. The compensation shall be determined as follows:
1. In case of death or total disability, the compensation shall be equivalent
to the employee's gross salary for two years or the legally prescribed
blood money, whichever is greater.
Death caused by overwork or stress and fatigue shall be considered a
work‐related injury, provided that it is proved by a medical report issued
by the competent medical authority.
2. In case of partial disability, the compensation shall be estimated by a
percentage of the total disability compensation equivalent to the
percentage of the partial disability to the total disability as determined
by the competent medical authority.
Article (126)
The amounts due to the employee from the Government Agency shall not be
subject to any deduction or lien except for settling a judgment debt or
adjudicated sum or settling the amounts due to the Government Agency,
whether such amounts are related to his/her job performance or the recovery of
what he/she might have unjustly received. The deducted amounts or the
amounts subject to lien shall not exceed the quarter of the gross salary. In the
event of competition, the priority shall be given to the adjudicated sum, then
for the debt due to the Government Agency, and then to the other debts.
Article (127)
The periods set forth in this Law and its Executive Regulations shall be
calculated in accordance with the Gregorian calendar.
Article (128)
The Minister shall issue the necessary resolutions to implement the provisions
of this Law and its Executive Regulations.
Chapter XIV
Transitional Provisions
Article (129)
Qatari employees of the Government Agencies shall be transferred in
accordance with the Salary Schedule (1) enclosed herein. Upon transfer, such
employees shall retain their basic salaries paid at the date of entry into force of
this Law, even if their salaries exceed the maximum salary pay scale for their

grade, and they shall retain their seniority standing in the same grade referred
to.
Article (130)
Subject to the provisions of Article (2) of the issuance law and the Manual on
Public Positions Description, Classification and Grading, the government
agencies, which applied special employment regulations or rules upon the entry
into force of this Law, shall transfer their employees to such grades in
accordance with the Salary and Grade Schedule (1) enclosed herein. This
transfer shall not be valid, unless it is approved by the Competent Department.
Upon transfer, the employees of Government Agencies shall retain their basic
salaries paid at the date of entry into force of this Law, in accordance with the
approved employment regulations or rules, on a personal basis, even if their
salaries exceed the maximum salary pay scale for the grade to which they are
transferred.
Allowances and bonuses paid to employees of such Agencies shall be adjusted
in accordance with the provisions of this Law. If the allowances and bonuses
which were paid prior to the date of entry into force of this Law are payable in
higher category than that is prescribed by this Law, the difference shall be kept
for them as a retention bonus.
The Minister shall issue a resolution determining the other rules governing the
transfer of the Qatari employees to grades equivalent to their grades, and the
rules governing the transfer of non‐Qatari employees to such grades in
accordance with the Salary and Grade Schedule (2) enclosed herein.
Until the transfer is completed, the employees of Government Agencies shall
continue to receive their gross salaries as at the date of entry into force of this
Law, pursuant to their approved employment regulations.
Article (131)
Qatari employees of the Government Agencies who are in service upon the date
of entry into force of this Law shall retain, on a personal basis, the bonus or
allowance prescribed to them as per the employer under the name of special
bonus in a lump sum of the gross salary received by the employee at the date of
entry into force of this Law.
Such employees shall be entitled to the bonus referred to in the preceding
Paragraph, when transferred to another Government Agency as a result of the
reorganization of the agency from which they are transferred or the transfer of
its affiliation or for any other reason, with exception the case where the transfer
is made upon the employee's request.
The bonus referred to in the first Paragraph may not be granted to the
employees who are appointed in such Agencies as of the date of entry into force
of this Law.
Article (132)

Qatari employees who have served in the first grade for no less than five years
upon the date of entry into force of this Law shall be transferred to the special
grade, provided that the employee's performance evaluation level for the last
two years is not less than very good and the employee has obtained a secondary
school certificate, equivalent or higher. In such case, the employee shall receive
the minimum pay scale for the grade to which he/she is transferred or the basic
salary he/she was receiving at the date of entry into force of this Law,
whichever is greater.
Transfer shall not affect the date of the periodic increment whenever the
conditions for entitlement are fulfilled.
Article (133)
The actual service for which the End of Service Gratuity is paid or settled under
Law No. (24 ) of 2002 referred to shall be deducted from the service period for
which the End of Service Gratuity is due in respect of the Qatari employees who
are in service at the date of entry into force of this Law or who were retired
following 06/03/2003. In such case, the End of Service Gratuity shall be
calculated in accordance with the principles established as of 05/03/2003, and
based on the last basic salary received by the employee upon retirement or
payment of the End of Service Gratuity.

Salary and Grade Schedule (1) For Qatari Employees:
The salary and grade schedule for Qatari employees starts with the Undersecretary and Assistant Undersecretary positions, both having fixed pay scales of QR 65,000 and QR 55,000 respectively, with no periodic increments. For the Excellent Grade, salaries range from QR 43,000 to QR 50,000, with an annual increment of QR 1,000. Similarly, the Special Grade offers a range from QR 35,000 to QR 45,000, also with a QR 1,000 annual increment. The First Grade has a salary range of QR 27,200 to QR 37,000, the Second Grade ranges from QR 21,600 to QR 30,400, and the Third Grade ranges from QR 19,200 to QR 27,200, all with annual increments of QR 800. The Fourth Grade ranges from QR 16,000 to QR 22,400, the Fifth Grade from QR 14,400 to QR 19,500, and the Sixth Grade from QR 12,800 to QR 17,600, all with QR 600 annual increments. The Seventh Grade salaries range from QR 9,600 to QR 14,400, the Eighth Grade from QR 8,800 to QR 12,000, and the Ninth Grade from QR 7,200 to QR 10,400, all with QR 400 increments. Finally, the Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Grades have ranges of QR 5,600 to QR 8,800, QR 4,800 to QR 7,200, and QR 4,160 to QR 5,600 respectively, with annual increments of QR 400 for the Tenth Grade and QR 200 for the Eleventh and Twelfth Grades.


Salary and Grade Schedule (2) For Non-Qatari Employees:
The salary and grade schedule outlines the pay structure for employees based on their grades. For the Excellent Grade, salaries range from QR 23,000 to QR 26,000. The Special Grade offers a range from QR 19,000 to QR 23,000, while the First Grade salaries range from QR 17,000 to QR 20,000. The Second Grade has a salary range of QR 13,500 to QR 17,000, and the Third Grade ranges from QR 12,000 to QR 15,000. Fourth Grade employees earn between QR 10,000 and QR 12,000, Fifth Grade employees between QR 9,000 and QR 11,000, and Sixth Grade employees between QR 8,000 and QR 10,000. Seventh Grade salaries range from QR 6,000 to QR 8,000, Eighth Grade from QR 5,500 to QR 7,500, and Ninth Grade from QR 4,500 to QR 6,500. For the Tenth Grade, salaries are between QR 3,500 and QR 5,500, the Eleventh Grade between QR 3,000 and QR 4,500, the Twelfth Grade between QR 2,600 and QR 3,500, and the Thirteenth Grade between QR 2,200 and QR 3,000.


Schedule (3)
Occupational Diseases
Occupational Disease
‐ Poisoning by chrome and
the resulting ulcerations and
inflammation of mucous
membranes and skin.
‐ Poisoning by Nickel and the
resulting nose Mucous
membranes, sinuses, or nasal
passages and lung's cancer
‐ Poisoning by Carbon
Monoxide and the resulting
complications

‐ Poisoning by Cyanic acid
and its compounds and the
resulting complications

‐ Poisoning by Chlorine,
fluoride, bromine and their
compounds as well as the
resulting diseases.

‐ Poisoning by ethylene
tetrachloride and ethylene
trichloride and other halogen
derivatives of hydrocarbon
compounds (Group A)

‐ Occupational deafness

‐ Cadmium poisoning
‐ Poisoning by Beryllium or
one of its compounds
‐ Writer's Cramp (Cramps of

Activities and works causing the Disease
Any work involving the use or handling of
chrome acid or sodium chromate, potassium,
zinc or any other substance containing these
components.
Any work involving the preparation or
handling of Nickel or any other substance
containing Nickel or its compounds.
Any wok involving exposure to Carbon
Monoxide in the course of its preparation, use
or generation in such places as garages, brick
and lime burning, wells and mines.
Any work involving the preparation, use or
handling of Cyanic acid or its compounds or
exposure to fumes or vapors of Cyanic acid or
its compounds or any substance containing it.
This includes activities where Cyanic acid and
its compounds are prepared and used in
insecticides for forest and farm spraying.
In all activities involving preparation or use of
these substances and their compounds, such as
the preparation and use of chlorine in water
desalination and purification plants and in
chemical laboratories as well as the use of
fluoride to carve on glass and in water
distillation and purification plants.
Any work involving the use or handling of
these substances or exposure to their fumes or
fumes containing the same, e.g. in the
manufacture of paints and varnish or spraying
and painting with substances dissolved therein
as well as in glasses frame manufacturing and
when these substances are used as fat solvents
in cleaning and dyeing of clothes.
Works requiring exposure to loud noise e.g.
working in aircraft maintenance and
marshalling, mining, and other industrial
activities that produce loud noise.
Activities involving exposure to cadmium
fumes.
Any work involving exposure to fumes, vapor
or dust of Beryllium or one of its compounds.
Crafts involving recurrent and continuous use

hand and arm muscles)
‐ Varicose Vein
‐ Poisoning by Nitrous fumes
‐ Bladder and urinary tract
cancer

‐ Poisoning by chlorinated
naphthalene
‐ Poisoning by Dioxin
‐ Symptoms resulting from
exposure to high frequencies

of hand muscles e.g. clerical works and works
on telegraph apparatus.
Any work requiring standing up for long and
continuous hours.
All kind of activities involving exposure to
nitrous acid and its fumes.
Works requiring handling of the following
substances:
‐ Alpha or beta naphthylamine;
‐ Diphenyl or one of its derivatives;
‐ Salts of the previously mentioned
substances;
‐ Magenta or Auramine;
Activities of maintenance or cleaning of
machines which produce or use these
substances
Any work involving exposure to fumes, dust or
vapor containing chlorinated naphthalene.
Any work involving exposure to fumes or vapor
containing Dioxin.
Any work involving continuous exposure to
industrial activities accompanied with high
vibrations such as works on rocks drilling and
others.

